Graph Notes:


Example Problem: Have data on websites and want to search through them with what sites have links to eachother?

What is best for modeling connections between web pages?
What does this connection web look like?


A Graph is a data structure designed to show relationships between objects.

Graphs are also sometimes called a Network.

It is similar to a tree in many ways.
The vocabular for Nodes/Verticies is the same. Connections are also called Edges.


Infact, Trees are a Specific Type of Graph.


A Path in a Graph starts somewhere and follows the connections from one Node to another.

Many starting and end points are possible, so there is no concept of a 'Root Node' like in Trees


It is important to keep a Graphs definition somewhat vauge so that it can encompase all the different usecases.

For Example: It would be nice to say that Nodes are the parts of graphs that store data and that the edges are just the connections, but that isn't true.
            Edges can also store data too, Usually values of a cost asociated with the connection.


What an edge represents in an example could vary greatly.
Ex: If Nodes were people, the edges could be people who have met eachother, or live in the same city, or worked togheter.
    Edges could show how often people talk to eachother, etc.


Graphs have some additional properties that make them useful for modelling various types of data.

Edges can have a Direction, meaning a relationship between 2 nodes only applies one way and not the other.

A 'Directed Graph' is the term used to describe a graph where edges have a direction.

It is always possible to have more than one edge between 2 nodes. So we can have a directed edge going back and forth between 2 Nodes.

An 'Undirected Graph' has no sense of direction.

Ex: A graph that has nodes for people, and edges as their working together, has no reason to include direction.


Cycle
    A cycle happens in one graph when a path taken results in starting at one node and following edges all the way back to the starting node.

    Graphs with a Cycle can be really dangerous when working on algorithms. When searching for a specific node in a graph for example,
    we don't want to keep searching the same nodes over and over again.

    Cycles result in an infinite loop for these types of algorithms.

    Some algorithms require that your graph has no cycles, or is 'Acyclic'.

    Acyclic is a graph with no Cycles.



Directed Acyclclic Graph (DAG)
    A type graph that tends to show up often.
    
    A Graph that has edges with directions, as well as no cycles.



Connectivity:
    Has a special meaning in terms of 'Graph Theory'

    A Disconnected Graph has some vertex/Node that can't be reached by the other Nodes/vertices.

    A Connected Graph has no disconnected verticies/nodes

    Connectivity is a meteric used to describe a graph as a whole.

    It describes the minimum number of elements that need to be removed for a graph to become disconnected.

    The answer can sometimes be used to answer the question of which graph is stronger.

    Ex. A Graph where each node is connected to each other, vs, a graph where each node only has one connection.
    The Connectivity for the first is very high, where as if one edge was removed from the second graph, the graph would no longer be connected.

Disconnected:

Disconnected graphs are very similar whether the graph's directed or undirected—there is some vertex or group of vertices 
that have no connection with the rest of the graph.

Weakly Connected:

A directed graph is weakly connected when only replacing all of the directed edges with undirected edges can cause it to be connected. 
Imagine that your graph has several vertices with one outbound edge, meaning an edge that points from it to some other vertex in the graph. 
There's no way to reach all of those vertices from any other vertex in the graph, but if those edges were changed to be undirected 
all vertices would be easily accessible.

Connected:

Here we only use "connected graph" to refer to undirected graphs. In a connected graph, there is some path between one vertex and every other vertex.

Strongly Connected:

Strongly connected directed graphs must have a path from every node and every other node. So, there must be a path from A to B AND B to A.



Graph Representation:


    Graphs could be functionaly the same, but built in a handfull of different ways.

    In Object Oriented Programing Languages:
        Create Vertex/Node Object and a Edge Object.
        Vertex/Node:
            Properties: Name, id number, etc.
            List of Edges connected.
        Edge:
            Strengh, id number, etc.
            List of Verticies/Nodes connected.
        
        Opertaions that traverse graphs however can be more inconvinent 
        if you need to search through vertex and edge objects.

        There are various ways we can represent connections on simple graphs that only use Lists.

    Representing Edges:
        Edge Lists:

            0 -  1         Edges List of this graph is:
              /  |          [[0,1], [1,2], [1,3], [2,3]]
            3  -  2

            The numbers used in an Edge List usually correspond to id numbers for each Vertex/Node

            Because this is a list of lists, it is called a 2D List.
        
        Adjacency List:

            An Adjacency list for the graph above is:
            Each index of the array is the id of a list that represents 
            the edges for each node.
            Ex. Node with id 1 has edges to nodes with id 0,2,3

            id:0   id:1       id:2       id:3
            [ [1] ,  [0,2,3] , [1,3] ,    [1,2] ]
            Again this is a 2D List.

        Adjacency Matrix:
            A matrix is a 2D List/Array, where the lists inside are all the same length.

            A matrix is also called a rectangular array.
                id: 0,id:1, id:2 id:3
            id:0   [[0,  1,  0,  0],
            id:1   [1,  0,  1,  1],
            id:2   [0,  1,  0,  1],
            id:3   [0,  1,  1,  0]]

            Indicies in the outer array still represent Nodes with those IDs.
            The lists inside still represent which nodes are adjacent.
            Now the List inside just stores a 1 in the index where the connection exists.

            Ex. Node 0 has only 1 connection with Node 1, so there is a 1 in the column for Node 1 in the list for Node 0.

            Note: The Index where the row number is equal to the column number is always 0.

            Note: Each edge is represented twice in the matrix.
                    Ex. Edge between 0 and 1 is represented in the list for Node 0 and the list for Node 1.


        The method of representation used depends on what makes the most sense, and what operations you use the most often.

        Ex. If we frequently calculate the Node Degree, or the number of edges connected to a particular node, 
            The Adjacency List is probably the fastest.
            (only involves the index of the node we want, and the length of the list we find in that index represents the number of connections)


Graph Traversal:

    Graphs are great for modelling connections between elements.
    Graph traversal is similar to tree traversal.

    Two basic methods for traversal are Depth-First Search, and Breadth-First Search.

    Depth-First Search (DFS):
        Search through one path as far as it goes.

        Keep in mind that Graph Search and Graph Traversal are roughly the same thing.

        Unlike a tree, a graph has no root node.
        We can begin at any Node in a Graph.

        Be sure to mark the node selected as Seen, so we know if we end up back at the same node.

        Common implementations of DFS use a Stack to keep track of nodes already seen.

        1) Follow one edge and mark that node as seen. (add it to a stack)
        2) Keep going until you reach a node you have already seen before.
           At this point you can go back to the previous node and try another edge. (pop stack and see another edge on this node)
        3) Continue this until the stack is empty, or you have found the Node you are searching for.

        There are also common implementations that use recursion instead of a stack.
            Base Case: Pick an edge and mark a node as seen until you run out of new nodes to explore.
                    Then when no more is found, return the result and the previous function is continued.
        
        In this Implementaiton we are visiting every Edge and Vertex/Node once.
        Therefore there is a O( |E| + |V| ). It is technically 2|E| due to visiting edges twice when you return to it.

        The number of edges on its own tends to summarize the runtime pretty well, but the time taken to look up a Node/Vertex is accounted for by |V|
        The time taken to find a Vertex varies depending on the choice of data structure, so be sure to base it on the specific implementation when asked.

    Breadth-First Search (BFS): 
        Search through all adjacent nodes before moving onto the next level.

        1) Start at first node and mark it as seen.
        2) Visit edge and mark it as seen. (we can then add this node to a queue if we haven't seen it yet)
        3) Keep visiting adjacent nodes and add them to the Queue.
        4) When you are out of edges, we can dequeue and use that as our next starting point.

        We are still visitng every node and edge so
        the efficiency is still O( |E| + |V| )

        

Notable Types of Paths:

    Path is just a specific route you take in a traversal/search.

    A Path could be crated that travels through every graph at least once.
    This type of path is called a Eulerian Path.

    Eulerian Path:
        Traverse each edge at least once.
        In a basic Eulerian path:
            1) Start at one node.
            2) Traverse through all edges.
            3) You might end up at a different node.

    Eulerian Cycle:
        Traverse every edge once and only once, and end up at the same node you started with.

    Note: 
        Not every graph can possibly have a Eulerian Path/Cycle. In many graphs you will get stuck on an 
        outer Node, and won't be able to reach the other Nodes without travelling over an edge you have aleady seen.

    Trick for determining wether a Eulerain Cycle is Possible:
        Eueler has stated that Graphs only have Eulerian Cycles if all
        Verticies/Nodes have an Even Degree/ an Even number of edges connected to them.

    Eulerian Paths are a little more leniant:
        It is okay for a graph to have 2 Nodes with an Odd Degree, as long as they 
        are the start and End Node of the Path.

    
    Algorithm for determining Eulerian Cycles:
        1) Start at any vertex/node until you return back to that vertex.
        2) If you didn't encounter every edge, start from an unseen edge connected to a node you alread visited.
        3) Create a path through those unseen edges and repeat.

        This process can be continued until every edge in the graph has been seen once.
        Then the paths could be added togehter combining them in the nodes they have in common

        This algorithm is really efficient:
            O( |E| )
            since it visits every edge once
    
    Hamiltonian Paths:

        A type of path that must go through every Vertex/Node once and only once rather than Edge.

    Hamiltonian Cycle:
        Will start and end in the same Vertex/Node

        Trying to decide wheter a graph has a Hamiltonian Path is a famous issue in computer science
        called the Hamiltonian Path Problem.

        If you have a Circuit than you ahve a path. To make the path you just remove an edge.

        There is no generall theorem that tells if a Hamiltonian Path or circuit possible, you kinda
        just have to try.

        Vertex Visiting issue is the "Travelling salesman" problem.
            Ex. 5 Cities and we want to go to each city once, and roads don't matter

        Some Rules:
            A simple Graph (n vertices where n>=3) is Hamiltonian if every
            vertex has a degree n/2 or greater.
            Basically means you have lots of edges from every vertex so a only hitting

        




